nixos/system/boot/bootloaders: init (#244907)
NixOS/nixpkgs: nixos/modules/system/boot/loader/bootloaders.md

# Bootloaders in NixOS {#sec-bootloaders}

> NixOS has a rich and sophisticated boot story.

Author: I can remove that line if you want and you can enjoy the technical terms just after that line

> NixOS has a rich and sophisticated boot story.
> 
> There are multiple ways to boot NixOS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NixOS can boot in multiple ways:
```

    enable = mkEnableOption (lib.mdDoc "new bootloader I want to support");
  };

  config = mkIf cfg.enable {
    boot.loader.myNewBootLoader = {
      id = "new-bootloader";
      installHook = "an installation script that takes a top-level path as an argument";
      supportsInitrdSecrets = mkForce false; # does it support the initrd secrets feature or not?
    };
  };
}
```

Once you register this NixOS module in your configuration, you can use `boot.loader.myNewBootLoader.enable = true;` to use it.

### Installation script {#sec-add-new-bootloader-installation-script}

The installation script can be any binary that receives the system top-level as an argument.

It is recommended to extract only the [bootspec document]() from that top-level
path, i.e. `$toplevel/boot.json` and generate the boot entries based only on
that document to avoid observing unstable pieces of data.

If you need data that's not present in the bootspec document, consider setting a bootspec extension
and/or assert for its existence at evaluation time in your NixOS module.

It is recommended to consider the consequences of using an installation script

> written in a language requiring a lot of dependencies, this implies that your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
written in a language requiring a lot of dependencies, as this implies that your
```

> users will have to download the final script's runtime closure, in cases of
> rebuild, they will need to also download the final script's build time closure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
users will have to download the final script's runtime closure, in every rebuild of their configuration they will need to also download the final script's build time closure.
```

# Bootloaders in NixOS {#sec-bootloaders}

NixOS has a rich and sophisticated boot story.

There are multiple ways to boot NixOS:

- Direct boot of kernel and initrd, see [QEMU Direct Boot](https://qemu-project.gitlab.io/qemu/system/linuxboot.html) or [LinuxBoot](https://www.linuxboot.org/)
- Network boot via [iPXE](https://ipxe.org/), [PXE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preboot_Execution_Environment)
- Media boot via CDROMs, DVDs, USBs, SD cards or any "removable media" of the same nature
  - via UEFI
  - via legacy BIOS
  - via a generic-extlinux-compatible configuration file

For each of this option, NixOS may or may not support a specific bootloader backend, for example:

- GRUB supports legacy BIOS and UEFI but not generic-extlinux-compatible configuration files
- systemd-boot supports only UEFI and relies on a working UEFI implementation for many things
- generic-extlinux-compatible is useful for systems like Raspberry Pi or similar

## Installing multiple bootloaders at once {#sec-bootloaders-multiple}

> NixOS supports installing multiple bootloaders at once, most of the users are interested into installing one bootloader,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NixOS supports installing multiple bootloaders at once, but most users will only require one bootloader,
```

> and this is what the NixOS installers will often do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and most NixOS installers will do that.
```

> Nevertheless, there are situations where it is desirable to install multiple bootloaders at once inside of a NixOS system,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, there are situations where it is desirable to install multiple bootloaders at once inside one system,
```

for example:

- an ISO image with GRUB as legacy bootloader and systemd-boot as UEFI bootloader.

> - an image with systemd-boot as UEFI bootloader and generic-extlinux-compatible configuration file for any firmware that does not work with UEFI by default, e.g. U-Boot based system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- an ISO image with systemd-boot as the UEFI bootloader and generic-extlinux-compatible configuration file for any firmware that does not work with UEFI by default, like U-Boot based system.
```

Author: Thank you for your suggestions, but please avoid changing `e.g.` in `like`, I don't see any good reasons to do so. If you care about that sort of things, consider doing your own follow-up PRs. This is just noise to me.
